Tribhuvan University

Institute of Science and Technology

2082

Course: MDS 503 – Statistical Computing with R
Level: MDS / I Year / First Semester / Science (Data Science)
Full Marks: 45
Pass Marks: 22.5
Time: 2 Hours

Instructions:

Candidates are required to write answers with examples for question numbers 1–5 in the answer sheet and use a laptop for answering question numbers 6–10 with R scripts/markdown. R scripts/markdown must be knitted as PDF with the outputs/interpretation of question numbers 6–10 and saved in a folder with the R script/markdown and the exam roll number for grading.

Attempt all questions.

⸻

Group A (5 × 3 = 15)

1. Explain the following concepts with examples:

a) Categorical variable and its type in R

b) Date variable and its type in R

⸻

2. Describe the following concepts with example:

a) Reviewing the data frame for missing values in R

b) Getting summary statistics without missing values in R

⸻

3. Explain the following concepts with examples:

a) Grammar of graphics – Wilkinson’s approach

b) Five-number summary

⸻

4. Explain the following concepts with examples:

a) Decision Tree

b) Support Vector Machine (SVM)

⸻

5. Explain the following concepts with examples:

a) Biplot from Principal Component Analysis (PCA)

b) Biplot from Classical Multidimensional Scaling (MDS)

⸻

Group B (5 × 6 = 30)

6. Load the igraph package in RStudio and perform the following basic SNA tasks using an R script to knit PDF output:

a) Define g1 as a graph object with the vertices:

("R", "S", "S", "T", "T", "R", "R", "T", "U", "S")

as its elements.

b) Plot g1 with:

* Node color = Green
* Node size = 30
* Link color = Red
* Link size = 5

Interpret the graph.

c) Compute the degree of g1 and interpret the results carefully.

d) Compute the closeness of g1 and interpret the results carefully.

⸻

OR

Perform the following using the airquality dataset in R and knit PDF output:

a) Replace missing values of the Ozone variable with its median and save it as corrected Ozone.

b) Plot the histogram of the corrected Ozone variable using base R and interpret it carefully.

c) Plot the boxplot of the corrected Ozone variable using base R and interpret it carefully.

d) Obtain appropriate summary measures of the corrected Ozone variable with justification.

⸻

7. Perform the following in RStudio and knit PDF output:

a) Open R and go to Help → Manuals (PDF) and open the “An Introduction to R” file.

b) Import this PDF file into R using the pdftools package.

c) Perform preprocessing and create a corpus using the tm package.

d) Find the most frequent terms and create a histogram of the most frequent terms.

⸻

OR

Using the mtcars dataset, perform the following and knit PDF output:

a) Create a bar plot of the mpg variable using ggplot2 and interpret it carefully.

b) Create a boxplot of the mpg variable using ggplot2 and interpret it carefully.

c) Create a scatter plot of mpg and wt using ggplot2 and interpret it carefully.

d) Compute the appropriate correlation coefficient between mpg and wt and interpret it carefully.

⸻

8. Perform the following using the airquality dataset in R Markdown and knit PDF output:

a) Perform the Shapiro–Wilk test on the Wind variable and check whether it follows a normal distribution.

b) Perform Bartlett’s test on the Wind variable grouped by Month and check the equality of variances.

c) Fit a one-way ANOVA model to compare the Wind variable across Month and interpret the result carefully.

d) Fit the Tukey HSD post-hoc test with 95% confidence interval and interpret the result carefully.

⸻

9. Perform the following using the mtcars dataset in R Markdown and knit PDF output:

a) Divide the dataset into 70:30 train-test splits using your roll number as the random seed.

b) Fit:

* A supervised Linear Regression model
* A KNN Regression model

using mpg as the dependent variable and all other variables as independent variables.

c) Predict the miles per gallon (mpg) for the test dataset and obtain predicted values for observations with:

wt < 6000 lbs

d) Compare the following fit indices for both models:

* R²
* MSE
* RMSE

Choose the best model.

⸻

10. Use the USArrests dataset in RStudio and knit PDF output:

a) Fit a Hierarchical Clustering model using Single Linkage and obtain the dendrogram.

b) Fit a Hierarchical Clustering model using Complete Linkage and obtain the dendrogram.

c) Fit a Hierarchical Clustering model using Average Linkage and obtain the dendrogram.

d) Determine the optimal number of clusters (k) by drawing appropriate horizontal cut lines (abline) on the dendrogram of the best hierarchical clustering model.